---
layout: post
title: "Exploring training an LLM in WASM from Scratch"
date: 2025-12-21 13:45:00
categories: blog
tags: machine-learning
---

I was feeling ambitious after completing the [MNIST training from scratch in Rust](https://paika.tech/blog/2025/12/06/mnist-dataset.html). It was addictive seeing it work - I can see why people get into machine learning.

My next experiment was to evolve my codebase to be able to train a language model in WASM entirely. I wanted to be able to have a demo I could show off in public, hence running it in WASM, so it could be easily shared on this blog similar to the [MNIST training demo](https://paika.tech/assets/mnist-visualizer/index.html).

This was hard and taught me a lot about language model training.

At a high level, language model training looks like this:
```mermaid
graph LR
  data[Data Fetching] --> dataset[(Dataset)]
  dataset --> tokenizer[Train Tokenizer]
  tokenizer --> tokenize[Tokenize Dataset]
  tokenize --> train[Train Model]
  train --> inference[Inference]
  inference --> eval[Evaluation]
```

The first issue was fetching training data in the browser - originally I tried scraping Wikipedia, this was slow, then I tried Project Gutenberg's collection of books but ran into CORS issues, finally I was able to work around CORS and get a lot of high quality text with [Project Gitenberg](https://www.gitenberg.org/).

Once I was able to get UI fetching a dataset, then I had to actually implement the transformer training architecture.  This was done collaboratively, with the help of Claude 4.5 Opus - I avoided any machine learning libraries and wanted to implement it from scratch with Claude. It would be better to implement it completely from scratch myself, but I didn't have the time for that and I learned a lot doing it with Claude from scratch.  Much more than just using a pre-built library like Candles.

I used [WebGPU](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebGPU_API) to do the training. Originally I implemented a basic training loop with a CPU, but was only able to get 2 GFLOPS which was far too slow.  This is obvious but was a learning experience for me - ML training is a lot of independent matrix multiplication. GPUs are much faster at this!

The key with iterating on the WebGPU implementation was:
1) Efficiently load memory (weights and biases) into the GPU
2) Avoid interrupting the GPU, keep everything on the GPU running and don't synchronize back to the CPU 

This took a while and the majority of the difficulty of the project, but eventually worked well - I was able to get 50 GFLOPS in the browser on my M1 Macbook Air. This is still lower than the 1 - 2 TFLOPS theoretical limit, but much better than 2 GFLOPS on the CPU!

Side note - I'm used to writing things in Rust for performance reasons.  Rust programs tend to just work better, since most other high level languages require a garbage collector and are thus less performant. This isn't true for model training - since the critical part is the GPU shaders, the actual CPU code doesn't really matter much (other than data loading and manipulation).

I also had Claude write me a subword/BPE tokenizer - originally the tokenizer training was incredibly slow, but I benchmarked and iterated to make it work within 1-2 minutes in the browser, both training the tokenizer on a 10 MB text signal as well as then tokenizing the training data.

Finally I had it working! I ran a training run overnight, loss went down and I played with the completion results and they were...awful. Only occasionally made any sense for a couple characters at most.

At this point I started to create an eval framework and ran it on my model. The results were low.

You can try it out here if you are curious - [LLM Training Visualizer](/assets/lm-visualizer/index.html).

#### Need more compute!

I realized the core problem was my training compute was too small. I really was looking for GPT-2 level coherence.  GPT-2 compute estimates vary, but let's assume it took 10^19 FLOPS ([source](https://dynomight.net/gpt-2/)).  1 GFLOP is 10^9, so to train a GPT-2 level model at 50 GFLOPS would take 2x10^8 seconds, 6 years. Even if I was able to get 1 TFLOPS out of my macbook, it would take 100 days to train. Far too long for a browser demo.

So GPT-2 level quality is out of the question, at least on consumer macbook hardware for a fun demo.

#### Pivoting
To train my own GPT-2, I need to do it on an actual NVIDIA GPU. Doing the math - GPT-2 is roughly 10^19 FLOPS required.  A NVIDIA A100 can do 93 TFLOPS, and an 8 node A100 on lambda labs can thus do 744 TFLOPS (7 × 10^14).  That would take 4 hours to train, roughly 50$ on [Lambda Labs](https://lambda.ai/). Very doable!

So this is the goal - improve the local performance of my rust training framework, and rent a node on Lambda Labs to train my own GPT-2 class model.

#### References
- An article by [Andrej Karpathy training a GPT-2 on lambda labs](https://github.com/karpathy/llm.c/discussions/481)
